# Angular 19 Tutorial - Part 3: Routing

## Eager route


### Generate the pages
Generate the `HomePage` component using the following command:

```bash
ng g c routes/home -c=OnPush --skip-selector --type=page
```

It is an special component with type suffix `Page`. We'll use the `ChangeDetectionStrategy.OnPush` strategy to improve the performance. Even you can skip the selector, because the component will be routed and not _selected_ at any template.
The component is placed on the `routes` folder for easy navigation. The folder could be named as `pages` or `views` as well. But it is recommended to differentiate those components from the rest of the application components.

### Configure the routes

The routes configuration is placed on the `app.routes.ts` file.

```typescript
import { Routes } from '@angular/router';
import { HomePage } from './routes/home/home.page';

export const routes: Routes = [
  {
    path: '',
    component: HomePage,
  },
];
```

### The router outlet

To display the `AboutPage` component, we'll add (or keep if already present) a `router-outlet` directive to the `AppComponent` template.

```html
<lab-header />
<router-outlet />
<lab-footer />
```

## Lazy routes

To avoid importing every component on the `app.routes.ts` file, we can use lazy routes. Otherwise, they will increase the initial load time of the application, because every imported code is packed on the main js bundle.

### Generate the pages

Generate the `AboutPage` component using the following command:

```bash
ng g c routes/about -c=OnPush --skip-selector --type=page
```
In order to facilitate its use, we'll export the class as `default`.

### Configure the routes

The routes configuration is placed on the `app.routes.ts` file.

```typescript
{
  path: 'about',
  loadComponent: () => import('./routes/about/about.page'),
}
```

The `loadComponent` is a function that returns a `Promise` of the component to load. The `import()` function is used to dynamically import the component at runtime. The Angular build process will bundle the component and its dependencies into a single js file, improving the performance and reducing the initial load time.

### Add links to the routes

To navigate to the `AboutPage`, we'll add a link to the `HeaderComponent`. Just change the anchor element substituting the `href` attribute for `routerLink` directive:

```html
<a routerLink="/about">About</a>
```

Just remember to import the `RouterLink` directive to the component imports array.

### More samples

```bash
ng g c routes/auth/login -c=OnPush --skip-selector --type=page
ng g c routes/auth/register -c=OnPush --skip-selector --type=page
```

Add the following routes to the `app.routes.ts` file:

```typescript
{
  path: 'auth/login',
  loadComponent: () => import('./routes/auth/login/login.page'),
},
{
  path: 'auth/register',
  loadComponent: () => import('./routes/auth/register/register.page'),
},
```

Add a router link to the `HeaderComponent` template:

```html
<a routerLink="/auth/login">Login</a>
```

And add another one to the `LoginPage` template with an absolute path:

```html
<a routerLink="/auth/register">Register if you don't have an account</a>
```
Or a relative path:

```html
<a routerLink="../register">Register if you don't have an account</a>
```

## Route parameters

### Generate the page component
Generate a page component to display the launch details:

```bash
ng g c routes/launches/launch-details -c=OnPush --skip-selector --type=page
```

### Configure the routes

Add the following route to the `app.routes.ts` file:

```typescript
{
  path: 'launches/:id',
  loadComponent: () => import('./routes/launches/launch-details/launch-details.page'),
}
```

### Add dynamic links to the route

Add a link to the `HomePage` template:

```html
<ul>
  @for (launch of launches; track launch.id) {
    <li> 
      <a routerLink="/launches/{{ launch.id }}">
        {{ launch.mission }} - {{ launch.date | date }}
      </a> 
    </li>
  }
</ul>
```

Improve the router link by using the array notation:

```html
<a [routerLink]="['/launches', launch.id]">{{ launch.mission }} - {{ launch.date | date }}</a>
```

### Get the route parameters

Configure the router with component input binding to get the route parameters at `app.config.ts` file:

```typescript
export const appConfig: ApplicationConfig = {
  providers: [provideRouter(routes, withComponentInputBinding())]
};
```

The param will be passed as an input signal to the component. At the `LaunchDetailsPage` component, we'll use the `input.required<T>()` method to get the parameter value.

```typescript
public readonly id: InputSignal<string> = input.required<string>();
```
 And use it as any other signal:

```html
<p>launch-details for <b>{{ id() }}</b></p>
```
